SARS-CoV-2 and interferon blockade
http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s10020-020-00231-w

Abstract
The response to viral infection generally includes an activation of the adaptive immune response to produce cytotoxic T cells and neutralizing antibodies. We propose that SARS-CoV-2 activates the innate immune system through the renin-angiotensin and kallikrein-bradykinin pathways, blocks interferon production and reduces an effective adaptive immune response. This model has therapeutic implications.

Covid-19 and the lungs
Respiratory transmission appears to be the primary route of infection in adults as both nasal and lung epithelial cells express ACE2 (Tay et al. 2020). The lower infection rate in children may relate, in part, to the lower expression of ACE2 on their nasal epithelium (Patel and Verma 2020). Infection of alveolar epithelial cells by virus leads to their death through cytopathic effects of the virus, and consequently to hypoxia. Hypoxia upregulates HIF1α leading to impaired interferon production but intact production of proinflammatory cytokines (Wobben et al. 2013). In the lung, bradykinin causes fibroblasts to produce chemoattracts for neutrophils (Ehrenfeld et al. 2006). Both angiotensin II and bradykinin increase vascular permeability, leading to extravasation of neutrophils into the lung. As serum from SARS-CoV-2 patients has been shown to induce netosis (Wang et al. 2020), it is highly likely that netosis occurs within alveolae further compromising lung function and leading to acute respiratory distress syndrome in some (Vabret et al. 2020).

Covid-19 and the brain
The effect of Covid-19 on the central nervous system has received some attention, but perhaps not enough. The virus responsible for SARS was found in brain tissue and the CSF (Xu et al. 2005; Hung et al. 2003). In general, virus may enter the brain by infecting leucocytes that penetrate a compromised blood brain barrier (BBB), by infecting brain-microvascular endothelium to enter the brain, or by direct penetration of nerves or microglia (Koyuncu et al. 2013). In the case of a virus like SARS-CoV-2 which is transmitted by inhalation, the virus most likely enters through olfactory bulb epithelial cells (Bilinska et al. 2020), and then enters ACE2 expressing microglia and neurons (Xu et al. 2005; Jaunmuktane et al. 2020; Ellul et al. 2020), although other recent studies suggest that non-neuronal cell types play a role in the development of anosmic symptoms (Bilinska et al. 2020; Brann et al. 2020). This direct entry of virus into brain parenchyma might account for the fact that anosmia is often a presenting symptom of Covid-19 infection. Once brain cells are infected and there is evidence for infection by glia by SAR-CoV-2, the RAS can be activated locally to initiate neuroinflammation. Microglia produce angiotensinogen, the precursor to angiotensin I and neurons produce ACE; both cell types express AT1 (Lanz et al. 2010). That the RAS can be important in sustaining neuroinflammation has been seen in Alzheimer’s disease and in a model of neuropsychiatric SLE (Oliveira et al. 2014; Nestor et al. 2018; Nocito et al. 2020). Moreover, HMGB1, which is released by activated microglia, potentiates the activation of the N-methyl d-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) on excitatory neurons (Balosso et al. 2014), with excessive activation leading to excitotoxic neuron death. The greater the activation of NMDARs, the greater release of proinflammatory HMGB1 by neurons, creating a positive feedback loop. Moreover, type 1 interferon induces production of quinolinic acid by microglia through an indolamine 2,3-dioxygenase (lDO) dependent pathway (Kwidzinski and Bechmann 2007); quinolinic acid is an NMDAR agonist. Thus, the amount of interferon that is induced by the SARS-CoV-2 virus may be inadequate for controlling viral replication but capable of enhancing an inflammatory environment that facilitates excitotoxic neuron death. In this model, viral infection in the brain can generate self-sustaining pathologic neuroinflammation. Indeed, as survivors of severe infection are followed through the recovery stage it is clear that many suffer from persistent cognitive impairment which may represent both neuronal loss and neuronal dysfunction (Helms et al. 2020).

Covid-19 and the vasculature
Angiotensin II binds AT1 on endothelial cells and leads to release of HMGB1 (Zhou et al. 2018; Nair et al. 2015), chemokines and pro-inflammatory cytokines and to increased vascular permeability. Of critical importance, activation of AT1 on endothelial cells also leads to increased expression of tissue factor which is necessary for thrombosis (Kunieda et al. 2003), a well appreciated and common morbidity in individuals with Covid-19. The combination of high expression of tissue factor on activated endothelial cells and activated monocytes favors a procoagulation state. Many Covid-19 patients also produce anti-phospholipid antibodies which also contribute to thrombosis (Zhang et al. 2020a).This model applies to those with severe infection, many of whom have preexisting conditions, such as obesity or being elderly, that lead to increased angiotensin II and AT1, or reduced ACE2 (Feraco et al. 2013; Hajifathalian et al. 2020; Chung et al. 2020). There appears, in contrast, to be a subset of Covid-19 patients who have mild symptoms and develop high antibody titers. We hypothesize that these individuals produce high levels of type 1 interferon which control the virus and deviate the B cell response to extrafollicular differentiation of plasma cells leading to high titers of antibody but no memory B cells. Indeed, survivors of SARS exhibited a lack of memory B cells (Wec et al. 2020). We would suggest that these individuals have a RAS skewed to higher ACE2 and anti-inflammatory pathways, and to pathways that do not inhibit production of type 1 interferon.Current and potential therapeutic interventions:Interferon is likely the most important intervention at the beginning of the viral infection as it might block viral replication. It will be less effective in already severe infection characterized by inflammation (Sheahan et al. 2020; Mueller 2020). Here (Fig. 1), we emphasize the need to explore interventions that specifically target the RAS or kallikrein-bradykinin pathway which we hypothesize are the major contributors to severe inflammation.Fig. 1ACE2 is a key enzyme in the RAS, catalyzing the metabolism of Ang II to Ang(1-7) and Ang I to Ang(1-9). ACE2 also mediates degradation of ACE-catalyzed breakdown products, Des-arg9-Bk (B1R agonist) and Lys-des-arg9-Bk. The net result of ACE2 in these two systems is to counterbalance ACE/Ang II/AT1R and Bradykinin/Des-arg9-Bk/B1R pathways. Through its cellular binding and entry mechanisms, SARS-CoV-2 is proposed to result in a reduction of ACE2, leading to elevations in Ang I and II, and leading to AT1R stimulation, and Des-arg9-Bk leading to B1R stimulation thus exacerbating inflammation, vascular leakage, and pro-fibrotic events. Potential therapeutics include those targeted to angiotensin and bradykinin system related peptides, in addition to peptides targeting the ACE2-viral spike (S) protein interactionFull size imageSeveral candidate therapeutics focus on the virus, targeting viral replication (remdesivir), viral entry (Arbidol, APN01, convalescent plasma, monoclonal antibodies (REGN-COV2), camostat mesylate), or critical viral proteins (protease inhibitors). Therapies targeting other viral entry receptors including CD147 (Ulrich and Pillat 2020) and GPR178 (Ulrich and Pillat 2020; Elfiky 2020) are other avenues of investigation. Several promising therapeutics are designed to block viral entry pathways or prevent propagation and spread of the virus in susceptible organs. These may, like interferon, be useful early in disease. Other therapies focus on host inflammatory mediators (IFN-α, IFN-β, TZLS-501:IL-6 specific mAb (monoclonal antibodies), TJM2:GM-CSF-directed Ab). Some of these strategies and others are reviewed in (Tay et al. 2020; Tu et al. 2020; Lima et al. 2020). Most recently, the FDA approved remdesivir for emergency use authorization (EUA) in COVID-19. At the same time, the World Health Organization (WHO) discontinued the hydroxychloroquine and lopinovir/ritonavir arms of its Solidarity trial (https://www.who.int/news-room/detail/04-07-2020-who-discontinues-hydroxychloroquine-and-lopinavir-ritonavir-treatment-arms-for-COVID-19. The only successful therapy to date to dampen host inflammation is dexamethasone, which affects multiple pathways and cell types. There has been controversy regarding targeting the RAS. Initially, there was concern that ACE inhibitors might exacerbate disease, but studies suggest they may, in fact, be of modest benefit (Patel and Verma 2020; Zhang et al. 2020b). Angiotensin receptor antagonists (losartan and telmisartan; ClinTrials.gov: NCT04355936) also warrant consideration. Some therapies in development are now also addressing the RAS. As ACE2 is the main viral entry receptor, ACE2 receptor antagonists based on peptides from the viral spike protein are being synthesized and tested, in addition to spike protein-targeted antagonists derived from critical binding regions in the ACE2 receptor (VanPatten et al. 2020). Therapeutics which target TACE and would inhibit ACE2 shedding (Haga et al. 2010) have also received consideration.As we have hypothesized that some of the inflammation induced in severe, and perhaps even moderate, Covid-19 is the result of dysregulation of the RAS and kallikrein-bradykinin pathways, the associated players serve as potential therapeutic targets (Fig. 1) As mentioned above, ACE inhibitors and AT1 blockers (ARBs) are approved and safe drugs. These pathways could be also be targeted with AT2 receptor-directed agonists (such as Angiotensin(1–9), Mas R agonists-AV0991, Angiotensin(1–7) (Zemlin et al. 2020; Paz Ocaranza et al. 2020). Bradykinin receptor antagonists are of potential interest, as bradykinin suppresses interferon production, enhances inflammation and causes vascular permeability (van de Veerdonk et al. 2020; Roche and Roche 2020). Therapeutics aimed to address the imbalance in angiotensin and kallikrein products pathway as well as inflammatory mediators such as HMGB1 are promising areas of future research in Covid-19 (Andersson et al. 2020). We propose that expedited development of therapeutics that target immune system modifiers focusing on those in the RAS and kallikrein/bradykinin pathway offer the most promising avenues for effective treatment of severe disease.The rapid sharing of global research information and the publication of novel hypotheses regarding both pathogenesis and therapy have greatly enhanced our understanding of this virus, and the lessons learned from ongoing clinical trials will continue to guide future research and therapeutics development.
