Hepatitis C virus enhances Rubicon expression, leading to autophagy inhibition and intracellular innate immune activation
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-72294-y

Abstract
Autophagy, a degradation system, works to maintain cellular homeostasis. However, as the impact of Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection on hepatocyte autophagy and its effect on HCV replication remain unclear, we examined them. HCV infection suppressed late-stage autophagy and increased Rubicon. siRNA-mediated knockdown of Rubicon promoted autophagy in HCV-infected cells. In Huh-7 cells harbouring the HCV replicon, Rubicon knockdown downregulated the expression of type 1 interferon (IFN)-related genes and upregulated HCV replication. Rubicon overexpression or administration of bafilomycin A1 or chloroquine, an inhibitor of late-stage autophagy, suppressed autophagy and activated the type 1 IFN pathway. On the other hand, Atg7 knockout suppressed early-stage autophagy and did not activate the type 1 IFN pathway. In livers of humanized liver chimeric mice, HCV infection increased Rubicon and enhanced type 1 IFN signalling. Elimination of HCV in the mice reduced the increase in Rubicon due to HCV infection. The expression levels of Rubicon and IFN-stimulated genes in chronic hepatitis C patients were higher than those in non-B, non-C hepatitis patients. HCV infection increased Rubicon and suppressed hepatocyte autophagy, leading to activation of the intracellular immune response. Rubicon induction is involved in HCV replication via activation of the intracellular immune response.

Introduction
Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is a positive-stranded RNA virus of the Flaviviridae family. Approximately 100 million people are affected with HCV worldwide1. Chronic infection with HCV leads to liver cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma2. Although most HCV-infected patients treated with direct-acting antivirals (DAAs) can achieve virologic cure, the development of HCV resistance to DAAs remains a problematic issue3,4,5,6.



Autophagy is a highly conserved cellular degradation process in virtually all eukaryotic cells that plays a pivotal role in removing the cells’ own damaged organelles and long-lived proteins to maintain cellular homeostasis7,8. Autophagosomes have been reported to accumulate in HCV-infected hepatocytes9. Shrivastava et al. reported that HCV infection activates mTOR signalling and autophagy via upregulation of Beclin110. It was also reported that HCV infection induces complete autophagy, which promotes HCV replication11. In contrast, Mori et al. reported that HCV infection impairs autophagic flux12. Whether autophagy is enhanced or suppressed by HCV remains controversial.In the present study, we examined whether autophagy is promoted by HCV infection and its effect on HCV replication in HCV-infected cells and livers. Here, we demonstrated that HCV infection suppressed autophagy by increasing Rubicon, a Beclin1‐interacting negative regulator of autophagosome‐lysosome fusion. Rubicon activated the intracellular immune response and suppressed HCV replication. The present study reveals the impact of the HCV-induced increase in Ruction on the intracellular immune system.

Discussion
In the present study, we clarified that hepatocyte autophagy is suppressed by HCV infection though upregulation of Rubicon. Furthermore, suppression of late-stage autophagy activates IFN signalling, which suppresses HCV replication. This study revealed that Rubicon-induced IFN signalling activation contributes to HCV replication in HCV-infected hepatocytes.Rubicon was discovered as a protein that negatively regulates the fusion of autophagosomes and lysosomes. Although the mechanism of the Rubicon homologue in C. elegans has been reported15, the regulatory mechanism of Rubicon expression in mammals has not been clarified. There have also been several reports on Rubicon and gastrointestinal diseases. In non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) patients, Rubicon in the hepatocytes increases, which causes liver steatosis and hepatocyte apoptosis induction1. In hepatocytes, HBV increases Rubicon, which suppresses IRF3 phosphorylation, leading to type I IFN suppression via inhibition of IRF3 import to the nucleus16. Since Rubicon negatively regulates the fusion of autophagosomes and lysosomes, Rubicon knockdown in non-infected cells decreases the LC3-II level (Sup. Figure 4A), while Rubicon overexpression enhances the LC3-II level (Sup. Figure 4B). However, in HCV infected cells, Rubicon knockdown or Rubicon overexpression did not induce a clear change in the LC3-II level, although autophagy flux was increased or decreased, as shown in Sup. Figure 4C or Fig. 2D, respectively. The levels of LC3-II in HCV-infected cells or HCV subgenome-transfected cells with bafilomycin A1 were significantly higher than those in uninfected cells or untransfected cells with bafilomycin A1, respectively (Fig. 1A, Sup. Figure 1B), indicating that HCV itself increases the LC3-II induction. In a Rubicon knockdown experiment, while Rubicon knockdown decreased the LC3-II levels, the Rubicon knockdown-induced HCV elevation served to increase the LC3-II levels. This effect of the Rubicon knockdown-induced HCV elevation may explain why Rubicon knockdown did not induce a clear decrease in LC3-II levels (Figs. 1F, 2A), although it increased autophagy flux, as shown in Sup. Figure 4C. Similarly, the Rubicon overexpression-induced HCV suppression may explain why Rubicon overexpression did not induce a clear increase in LC3-II levels (Fig. 2D), although it decreased autophagy flux, as shown in Fig. 2D.In the present study, forced expression of Rubicon or administration of bafilomycin A1 or chloroquine activated the intracellular type I IFN pathway. In contrast, knockout of Atg7 did not activate the intracellular type I IFN pathway. These results suggested that inhibition of hepatocellular autophagy at a late stage, but not an early stage, activated the intracellular type I IFN pathway. We could not clarify the underlying mechanisms by which inhibition of hepatocellular autophagy at a late stage activates type 1 IFN. In the present study, while Rubicon overexpression induced ISG15, ISG56 and MX1 (Fig. 3E), Rubicon knockdown reduced the expression levels of ISG15 and ISG56 but not MX1 (Sup. Figure 2E). ISGs are regulated not only by autophagy but also by HCV itself17. The Rubicon siRNA-induced HCV elevation served to upregulate the ISG expression levels, which may explain why Rubicon siRNA did not reduce the Mx1 expression levels.We showed that inhibition of the fusion of autophagosomes and lysosomes, such as that mediated by forced Rubicon expression or the administration of bafilomycin A1, elevated the gene expression of type I IFN, ISG15, ISG56, and Mx1 and inhibited HCV replication. Various ISGs have been reported to suppress HCV replication. Overexpression of PKR, Mx1, IRF-9, GBP-1, IFI-6–16, IFI-27, 25OAS or IRF-1 in HCV replicon-harbouring cells suppressed HCV replication18. Forcible expression of ISG15 in HCV replicon-harbouring cells19 or ISG56 in JFH-1-infected cells20 suppressed HCV. In our experiments, forced expression of ISG15, ISG56 and MX1 suppressed HCV replication (Sup. Figure 3D). On the other hand, under Atg7-knockout conditions, which inhibit autophagosome formation, HCV replication was inhibited, but the production of type I IFN, ISG15, ISG56, and Mx1 was not changed. HCV replication is said to occur in a membranous web formed by lipid droplets and single, double, and multiple membrane-like structures created by remodelling of the ER21. The double membrane-like structure is a major component of the membranous web and thought to be formed by NS5A early in infection. The double membrane-like structure contains NS3, NS5A, viral RNA and LC3-II and is thought to be related to autophagosomes22. Knockout of Atg7 inhibited membranous web formation23 and thus suppressed HCV replication but did not appear to involve intracellular immune activation.Wang et al. have reported that the suppression of Rubicon using siRNA decreased the HCV RNA level, while overexpression of Rubicon increased the HCV RNA level, mainly using as an experimental system Huh7.5 cells infected with the JFH-1 variant. Unlike these results, we demonstrated that the suppression of Rubicon using siRNA increased the HCV RNA level, while overexpression of Rubicon decreased the HCV RNA level, using Huh7 cell-derived replicons. Our study focused on how the alteration of hepatocyte autophagy by Rubicon drove intracellular immunity, and we used replicons derived from Huh7 cells because Huh7.5 cells have been reported to have a mutated RIG-I pathway14. The difference in the activation of the RIG-1 pathway between Huh7 and Huh7.5 cells may have led to these discrepancies.Chronic hepatitis C more frequently accompanies fatty liver complications than chronic hepatitis B24,25. In the present study, we clarified that HCV infection inhibits hepatocyte autophagy. In contrast, HBV infection was reported to enhance hepatocyte autophagy26. Hepatocyte autophagy is involved in lipid droplet metabolism27. In the livers of mice fed a high-fat diet (HFD), Rubicon expression was upregulated, leading to autophagy inhibition and resulting in an increase in lipid accumulation28. Hepatocyte-specific Rubicon knockdown ameliorated HFD-induced lipid accumulation in the livers of the mice28. Taken together, the data indicate that the increase in Rubicon in HCV-infected hepatocytes may contribute to lipid accumulation in the livers of chronic hepatitis C patients via autophagy inhibition.In conclusion, HCV infection enhances expression of the Rubicon protein and suppresses autophagic flux in hepatocytes. The suppression of autophagy in hepatocytes enhances intracellular immunity and suppresses HCV replication. In addition, upregulation of the Rubicon gene is involved in upregulation of the Rubicon protein by HCV infection, which was also confirmed in chimeric mice and human samples. Upregulation of the Rubicon gene at the time of HCV infection was confirmed to be reduced when HCV was eliminated by treatment in vivo.

Supplementary information

Supplementary file1Supplementary file2Supplementary file3Supplementary file4
