Applying the Popular Opinion Leader Intervention for HIV to COVID-19
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10461-020-02954-7


Applying the POL Model to COVID-19
Given our experience implementing the POL model with populations at risk for HIV, we are currently applying this model to communities being affected by COVID-19. As has been documented in many parts of the country, there are significant racial and ethnic disparities in COVID-19 in Milwaukee [34, 35]. Although 6.7% of Wisconsin’s residents are Black, they have comprised 21% of confirmed COVID-cases and 29% of COVID-related deaths. Additionally, over 30% of COVID cases are among individuals who identify as Hispanic or Latino, although they represent just 6.9% of the state’s population [35].With funding from the Advancing a Healthier Wisconsin Endowment, our project, 1000 Hometown Heroes, aims to engage 1000 local “heroes” in Milwaukee from predominantly African American and Latinx communities in an effort to address the racial and ethnic disparities in COVID-19. These ‘heroes’ are social influencers and leaders on various social media platforms who will share accurate, culturally relevant, tailored information about COVID-19 with their networks. We are recruiting POL who see themselves as change agents, want to help protect the health and psychosocial well-being of others in their communities, and are willing to spread the word about COVID-19 prevention and reduce disease stigma. Additionally, we are providing influencers information to connect community members to needed services, provide strategies to cope with stress, anxiety, and social distancing, and provide accurate, up-to-date information about the status of COVID-19 in the Milwaukee area. Aligned with social distancing guidelines for COVID-19 prevention, we are using online social networks as an efficient and effective way to disseminate accurate information and influence community norms and behaviors [36]. The POL model has been successfully adapted to online networks, allowing peer influencers to reach a large number of people in a cost-effective approach [37].In many ways, this approach is a modernization of efforts implemented during the 1918 flu pandemic. Postal workers, Boy Scouts, and teachers, as trusted community members, were asked to volunteer for health education campaigns and go door-to-door to educate families about public health practices [38]. With the advent of numerous social media platforms, we now have an opportunity for more efficient information spread from a larger segment of the population. Over the next six months, we will be evaluating the program’s reach and effectiveness, which may provide some early indication about how to quickly disseminate accurate, trusted information during public health crises, particularly to communities hardest hit by an epidemic.Adapting the popular opinion model, which has demonstrated significant success in HIV prevention, to COVID-19 is one example of how HIV prevention and intervention researchers can take lessons learned in HIV and apply them to current and future pandemics. While much of our current HIV research is on hold indefinitely, we have an opportunity to pivot and use what we have learned from nearly four decades of HIV research to assist in addressing the impact of COVID-19. We have a wealth of knowledge about infectious disease, stigma, sustained behavior modification, and social and structural facilitators of health disparities that should be adapted and shared to address other emerging infectious diseases.
