Responding to the COVID-19 Pandemic in Developing Countries: Lessons from Selected Countries of the Global South

Abstract
Reviewing selected policy responses in Asia and South America, this paper draws pragmatic lessons for developing countries to better address the COVID-19 pandemic. It argues that not acting quickly and adequately incurs much higher costs. So-called ‘best practices’, while useful, may be inappropriate, especially if not complemented by effective and suitable socio-economic measures. Public understanding, support and cooperation, not harsh and selective enforcement of draconian measures, are critical for successful implementation of containment strategies. This requires inclusive and transparent policy-making, and well-coordinated and accountable government actions that build and maintain trust between citizens and government. In short, addressing the pandemic crisis needs ‘all of government’ and ‘whole of society’ approaches under credible leadership.

The COVID-19 Pandemic: Salient Features
The COVID-19 pandemic, caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus, is now widely considered more infectious than other viral epidemics in last century following the 1918 Spanish flu pandemic, especially since the deadly Asian flu of the late 1950s and Hong Kong flu of 1968.Footnote 4 The COVID-19 fatality rate is lower than for the first severe acute respiratory syndrome (caused by SARS-CoV-1) in 2002–2003,Footnote 5 and is not more infectious than the H1N1 virus, but has infected many more people nonetheless.Footnote 6Several factors have made COVID-19 more dangerous than other recent viral epidemics. First, its symptoms and consequences are rather diverse and can be quite severe, varying with age. For example, while COVID-19 primarily affects the respiratory system, causing pneumonia, it has also been associated with gastrointestinal and neurological manifestations (Christakis 2020). Those infected may also mistakenly attribute their symptoms to influenza or other health conditions. Importantly, those infected with the SARS-CoV2 virus may be infectious well before showing any symptoms, while as many as half of those infected, and hence infectious, may be asymptomatic, i.e., not show any symptoms of illness. Hence, reliable new cheap and rapid tests for COVID-19 infection promise to be a major ‘game-changer’.R0 is the average number of individuals that an infected person infects when no interventions have been implemented; this number does not change. The ‘reproduction rate’—referred to as Rt or Re depending on preference or convention—will likely change as interventions are put in place, while the number of those susceptible changes due to infection and possible immunity.Major variations due to ‘super spreader’ episodes further complicate understanding of the significance of average rates and of variations. While ‘super-spreader’ episodes have received much publicity, they have been exceptional with a lower variation in Rt and hence less important for explaining contagion than ‘normal’ networks of viral transmission of COVID-19.Footnote 7 Again, with a lower fatality rate—the probability of a person dying—COVID-19 has been particularly hard to contain as there are more infectious people around than if it were more deadly.Footnote 8 Hence, movement restrictions, physical distancing, self-isolation and other precautionary and preventive measures are important.The virus can spread from person to person during close direct or indirect contact with an infectious person (even before they have symptoms), contact with aerosol- or droplet-borne virus from an infected person, either directly or indirectly. Infection, via mucous membranes in the mouth, nose or eyes, starts in the upper respiratory tract, typically in the throat or upper airways. Elderly persons and people with other health issues, such as asthma, diabetes, obesity, hypertension, etc. are more vulnerable, and likely to face complications and death.Improved understanding of COVID-19 has been critical for designing and improving policy responses. The SARS-CoV2 virus was considered novel as it had never been seen in humans before. Thus, initial responses in East, including Southeast Asia were drawn from known ‘best practices’ for testing, contact tracing, isolation and treatment. But, for various reasons, even these were not done in most countries outside Asia. Once the virus had spread widely, it was no longer practical or even possible to belatedly implement best practices effectively as case-loads not only overwhelmed hospitals, but also public health systems.Differences with earlier viruses and epidemics meant that simple emulation of past containment measures have not always been appropriate, let alone optimally effective for containing COVID-19. Government policymakers need to consider the general nature and specific variations of the COVID-19 pandemic and its uniquely changing and varied implications in particular contexts. A standardized set of interventions, even ostensible best practices, is unlikely to be universally applicable, as the COVID-19 pandemic has different ramifications in varied circumstances over time.The incubation periodFootnote 9 will require corresponding periods of quarantine or ‘self-isolation’. The varied duration of ‘mismatches’—e.g., due to incubation exceeding, or lasting longer than latency periodsFootnote 10—imply that countries need to urgently acquire the ability to rapidly and reliably test as widely as necessary. As this has not been affordable for many, especially in poorer countries, the development of cheap, quick and reliable tests promises to be crucial. Once widely available and used, such improvements in the speed, reliability and affordability of testing will have significant consequences.Footnote 11No one can be exempted from preventive or containment measures until it is definitively medically confirmed that all those once infected can be neither infected or infectious again. For the time being, face masks and shields, physical distancing and hand hygiene remain vital to containment efforts. The long-term health and economic impacts of COVID-19 imply that public health and social protection systems should be well prepared to manage them.Unfortunately, persuaded by the most influential, early western discourses, many politicians and others everywhere did not take the contagion threat seriously enough initially for various reasons. These include not only cultural prejudice, but also misinformation and confidence in alternative approaches, such as ‘herd immunity’,Footnote 12 all facilitated by the greater influence of social media.If and when an effective vaccine becomes available, there is no guarantee that it will be affordable and available to all without a strong multilateral commitment to ensure that it quickly becomes universally accessible. Furthermore, there are likely to be significant populations who may refuse to be vaccinated en masse, e.g., where civil libertarian ideologies and mistrust of vaccines and authorities are pervasive. Without such a shared commitment to universal access, it may be impossible to completely eradicate the COVID-19 threat in the foreseeable future.Footnote 13Recent US actions have not been encouraging for a concerted global response to the pandemic. As the largest financial contributor, the US decision to formally withdraw from the WHO will certainly hamper its efforts, not only for dealing with the current pandemic, but also for preventing or preparing for the next viral epidemic (McKeever 2020). Earlier in April, President Trump, using a Korean War-era law, sought to redirect surgical masks manufactured by the US transnational firm 3M in other countries to the US, and to stop exporting masks manufactured by the company in the US (Swanson et al. 2020).Footnote 14 The US confiscated 200,000 US-made face masks bound for Germany in Bangkok, and redirected them back to the US for use there, a move the German minister condemned as ‘modern piracy’.Footnote 15 US buyers also offered three times more to secure face masks from China destined for France (Willsher et al. 2020). Meanwhile, ‘Trump’s trade policy is hampering the US fight against COVID-19, with Matt Rowan, president of the US Health Industry Distributors Association, warning ‘against the impact that Trump’s tariffs would have on the American health sector’ (Bown 2020).

Conclusion
While COVID-19 crisis challenges are undoubtedly unique, they are not exceptional insofar as such challenges all have unique characteristics. Nevertheless, the challenges have probably been far greater than for other recent epidemics, raising questions about earlier tested modes of response.Full social mobilization is undoubtedly needed, but such exceptional ‘emergency’ or even ‘wartime-like’ measures must not be abused, e.g., by the temptation to skew implementation for despotic, political or pecuniary advantage. Hence, success can be greatly enabled by legitimate, credible and exemplary leadership, government and otherwise.Countries can have less disruptive and less costly, but yet very effective containment strategies, especially if they act early, quickly and adequately. The ability to trace and test as many suspected cases as possible, e.g., those who have recently come into close physical proximity with an infected person, is also crucial.Effective containment depends heavily on voluntary compliance, and hence, community acceptance and trust, helped by transparency and shared understanding of what needs to be done. All these require state capabilities working together (‘all of government’) as well as credible and inclusive leadership to mobilize and co-ordinate the ‘whole of society’ for effective containment of contagion, as in the southwest Indian state of Kerala and Vietnam.
