Abstracts from the International Science Symposium on HIV and Infectious Diseases (ISSHID 2019): Infectious diseases
http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s12879-020-05038-y


ISSHID: E-poster Presentations Abstract-5 Drug resistance profile of Gram negative and related exotic bacterial isolates from an urban hospital in Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India
Reenaa Muthu1, Gayathri Devanandan1, Lalitha Kameswari Sankaranarayanan1, Parthiban Rudrapathy2
1Department of Microbiology, Ethiraj College for Women, Chennai, Tamilnadu, India; 2Division of Microbiology, Department of Clinical Laboratory Services and Translational Research, Malabar Cancer Centre, Thalassery, Kerala, IndiaBackground: Despite the impressive range of therapies available for treating patients in intensive care, bacterial infections continue to be the major challenge worldwide. Impact of gram negative organisms on clinical disease is well known but exotic bacterial pathogens such as Ralstonia sp are lesser known members of this group. Infections related with exotic pathogens are often reported in mechanically ventilated patients particularly associated with those who are immunocompromised. This study aims to analyse the gram negative pathogens and their antibiotic susceptibility profile from various clinical and environmental samples (blood, urine, IV and fomites) from an urban multi-speciality hospital in Chennai, Tamilnadu, India using standard protocols and the data discussed.Methods: Basic microbiological techniques were used to screen the clinical and hospital environmental specimens for gram negative bacteria and their antibiotic susceptibility testing was performed by standard disc diffusion method according to CLSI guidelines. Bacterial isolates which could not be confirmed by basic phenotypic techniques were identified by using automated bacterial identification system (VITEK-2, Biomerieux) and their antibiogram was noted.Results: A total of 40 clinical samples (39 urine and 1blood) and 60 environmental samples were collected. Among these 16/39 urine samples and 17/60 environmental samples were positive for gram negative bacilli. All the gram negative isolates were resistant to nitrofurantoin used to treat UTI.Conclusion: Gram negative organisms and exotic gram negative pathogens are most often associated with hospital acquired UTIs. All Ralstonia sp isolated showed resistant pattern for nitrofurantoin, one of the antibiotic commonly used to treat urinary tract infections.

ISSHID Abstract-47 A quick method for designing and screening effective chemically modified siRNA against viruses – A perspective to employ RNAi in antiviral research
Showkat Ahmad Dar, Manoj KumarVirology Discovery Unit and Bioinformatics Centre, Institute of Microbial Technology, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, Chandigarh, IndiaBackground: Viral infections have a massive negative impact worldwide as evident from recent outbreaks. For example, dengue is emerging as global health problem affecting around 400 million people per year and nearly half of world population at its infection risk. The siRNAs are one of the natural antivirals and some of them are already FDA approved (Patisiran).Methods: We employed virus specific computational algorithms (VIRsiRNApred and SMEpred) for siRNA designing against dengue virus (DENV2) genome. We selected eleven siRNAs (si1 to si11) based on different criteria like varying inhibition efficacy, off targets and different genomic regions (5′-Untranslated region, Capsid, Pre-Membrane, Envelope and 3′-Untranslated region). The siRNAs were further chemically modified with deoxy-nucleotide at the two 3′overhangs. We cloned these genes in PsiCheck-TM2 plasmid and used dual luciferase assay for knockdown efficacy screening of the siRNAs. We tested the knockdown efficacy of siRNAs at three concentrations, their combinations and their toxicity using MTT assay in HeLa cells. Statistical analysis was done by one-way ANOVA with Tuckey post hoc test using R.Results: The designed siRNAs and their combinations performed according to their prediction efficacies. Also, the two siRNAs from earlier studies (for external validation) showed similar silencing efficacies. The siRNAs showed almost no toxicity compared to the scrambled siRNA.Conclusion: We demonstrate a rapid method to design, test and construct a repertoire of chemically modified siRNAs as antivirals without the use of live viruses or biosafety facilities. Our method also showed similar performance as compared to external live dengue virus.

ISSHID Abstract-63 Herpes Zoster of the Maxillary Division of Tri-germinal Nerve with superadded Streptoccocus viridans infection , in an Immunosuppressed Individual - A Case Report
Kiran.M1, Madhusudhan.B2, Pujita.B2
1Department of Microbiology, Sree Balaji Medical College & Hospital, Bharath University (BIHER), Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India; 2Department of Surgery, BRS Hospitals Pvt. Ltd, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, IndiaBackground: Herpes Zoster also known as Shingles, is a unilateral, painful vesicular condition, resulting from reactivation of the latent chicken pox (Varicella-Zoster) virus, present dormant in sensory ganglion of cranial nerves or dorsal root ganglion of spinal nerves. Though a self-limiting condition, it may take weeks to resolve especially in immunosuppressed individuals. There is a potential for developing aseptic meningitis, ocular sequelae, post herpetic neuralgia, disseminated zoster and superadded bacterial infections, which pose a great challenge to treating clinicians.Case Report: We report a case of an 80 year old woman, who came with complaints of burning sensation and multiple painful vesicular lesions on the right half of her face and palate associated with fever of one week duration. She had edema of right eye and an ulcer (2x1cm) below her right lower eyelid. Ophthalmic examination was normal. Radiological and blood parameters were normal, except for neutropenia. Blood and wound swab culture from ulcer showed, presence of Streptococcus viridans. Clinical diagnosis of Herpes Zoster involving Maxillary division of Tri-germinal nerve (right side) was made. Written informed consent was obtained from the guardian of the patient for the publication of this case report and accompanying images.Conclusion: Treatment using antiviral agents, antibiotics, corticosteriods, analgesics, anti-inflammatory drugs and corneal protection with ocular lubricants were started and patient showed good improvement. In case of severe Post herpetic Neuralgia, nerve block injections are suggested. Clinicians must be aware of the various complications and treatment modalities associated with the disease, especially in such immunosuppressed and aged patents.

ISSHID Abstract-76 Study of expression of Brennan Krohn virus in saliva of HIV seropositive and seronegative children
Kamaleswari P1,Ranganathan K1, Uma Devi K Rao1, Kiran Kumar2
1Department of Oral Pathology and Microbiology, Ragas Dental College & Hospital, Chennai, India; 2 Director, Genes N Life Health Care, Hyderabad, IndiaBackground: Salivary gland disease is defined as an enlargement of the salivary gland and/or complaint of xerostomia and histologically characterized by lymphocytic infiltrate of the salivary gland causing acinar atrophy. It has been reported in the literature that in an immunosuppressed setting, Brennan Krohn Virus(BKV) could infect the salivary gland eliciting a CD8T lymphocyte infiltrate and also be expressed in the saliva. In the setting of immunosuppression and immature immune system, Children infected with Human Immunodeficiency Virus are prone to reactivation of BKV if previously infected by the virus leading to disease progression thereby increasing the morbidity.Methods: This study was approved by the IRB of Ragas Dental College and Hospital. Saliva samples were collected from HIV seropositive and seronegative children after obtaining the consent from their parents/guardian. DNA was extracted from the saliva samples and subjected to Real time polymerase chain reaction to study the expression of BKV; the data collected were analyzed using SPSS 20 software.Results: Among the 30 HIV seropositive and seronegative children 27%(8/30) of them had detectable BKV load, 25%(2/8) crossed the threshold level of 200 copies/ml from both groups. We assessed the salivary flow rate and found that there was a decreased salivary flow rate(p=0.05) among the HIV seropositive children who crossed the threshold level of BKV.Conclusion: In this study we detected and quantified BKV in the saliva of both HIV seropositive and seronegative children, indicating that saliva is a potential source of BKV infection. "

ISSHID Abstract-81 Seroprevalance of Hepatitis B in pregnant females - a decade after introduction of Hepatitis B vaccine in Universal Immunization Program of India
Shilpee Kumar, Rojaleen DasDepartment of Microbiology, VMMC & Safdarjung Hospital, New Delhi, IndiaBackground: In India, Introduction of HBV vaccine was pilot-tested in 2002 and expanded to the entire country in 2011 under the Universal Immunization Program (UIP). It has been a decade since Hepatitis B vaccine has been introduced in UIP. The study was conducted to analyze the change in seroprevalence status of Hepatits B in females of reproductive age group.Methods: This was a retrospective observational study. The cohort enrolled for the study were pregnant females who attended the antenatal clinic of VMMC & Safdarjung Hospital in 2019. The blood sample was collected as a part of routine screening for HBV, HIV and syphilis. The samples were tested for HBsAg by qualitative indirect ELISA.Results: A total of 5513 pregnant females were enrolled in the study and 89 were seropositive for HBsAg. The seroprevalence was found to be 1.6% and highest in the age group of 30-35 year (2.7%). Studies before 2011 have shown seroprevalence of 2.3–6.3%.Conclusion: The seroprevalence of HBsAg has decreased over the years. However as India is the second most populated country, the seroprevalence of 1.6% amounts to nearly 4 million women in reproductive age infected with HBV and putting 4 Lakhs babies at risk of acquiring HBV by vertical transmission yearly. Vaccine delivery assessment is required to identify the gaps that may help in strengthening the national viral hepatitis control program of India.

ISSHID Abstract-101 Marine brown algal compounds inhibits HSV-2, an invitro analysis
Manikannan Mathaiyan, Lavanya Babu, Krupakar ParthasarathyCenter for Drug Discovery and Development, Col.Dr.Jeppiaar Research Park, Sathyabama Institute of Science and Technology, Chennai, IndiaBackground: Herpes Simplex Virus-2 (HSV-2) belongs to the family Herpesviridae, a causative agent of genital herpes. Wild-type HSV-2 may cause severe infections in neonates and HSV-2-infected individuals are placed at approximately three fold higher risk for acquiring human immunodeficiency virus. Vaccines against HSV-2 remain a challenging approach and also drug resistance is increasing. In this context, it is important to identify newer HSV inhibitors. In this study we aimed to identify the inhibitors from marine brown algae, Sargassum species.Methods:Sargassum swartzii, a Marine brown algae were collected from south coastal of Tamilnadu. Crude extracts were prepared by standard extractions procedure and phytochemicals present in the crude extracts were separated. Vero cells 2.5x105/well were infected with stranded HSV-2 strain and cytopathic effect (CPE) was calculated. 50- 200μg of phenolic compounds and flavonoids treated with HSV-2 infected vero cells for up to 72 hours. Percentage of inhibition was calculated based on number of plaques reduction. Acyclovir used as a drug positive control.Results: Number of plaques was calculated as 1.7x105/ml PFU/ml. Among the different conc. of test compounds tested 200μg/ml of flavonoids have shown less no of plaques. At tested 200μg/ml virus yield decreased by 90 fold indicates that plaques reduction was due to virus inhibition mediated by flavonoids antiviral property. This suppression is not due to cytotoxic effects of compounds, it was confirmed by MTT assay. Up to 500μg/ml of flavonoids were non toxic to vero cells.Conclusion: Flavonoids are the principle compounds potentially inhibit HSV-2 in invitro condition.

ISSHID Abstract-116 Early diagnosis and drug resistance detection of Pulmonary Tuberculosis by TRUENAT and LPA in a tertiary care hospital
D.Shireesha, A.Surekha, A.Renuka Devi, B.Nagajyothi, J.VijayalakshmiDept of Microbiology, Kurnool, 518002, A.P.Background: Tuberculosis is one of the most important diseases in india. Early diagnosis and detection of drug resistance is the only way in controlling the spread of tuberculosis. Newer diagnostic modalities have been extremely useful in achieving the same. so there is a need to know the prevalence of tuberculosis in our geographical area(kurnool A.P.) and to stratify the patients based on the variables like age ,sex, and drug resistance with help of TRUENAT and LPA .Methods: This is a prospective study done during the study period from march 2019 to June 2019.All the samples obtained during the study period were tested according to the RNTCP guidelines by using TRUENAT and line probe assay.Results: A total of 1221 sputum samples were processed during the study period.Out of 1221 samples 244 (19.9%)of the samples were positive for tuberculosis. Positivity rate was higher in males(69.2%) compared to females(30.7%).Rifampicin resistance was detected in 73(29.9%) of the cases by TRUENAT.Line probe assay has detected isoniazid resistance in 30(12.29%) of the positive samples out of which H monoresistance was observed in 18(7.3%) samples. Fluoroquinolone resistance and injectable aminoglycoside resistance was detected in 14 cases(5.7%).Bedaquline was started for 8 cases of DRTB.Conclusion: TRUENAT and LPA assays have been extremely useful in the diagnosis and identification of drug resistance of suspected tuberculosis cases.

ISSHID Abstract-124 Significant mutations in the genome of dengue virus serotype-1support its continuous circulation from 2014 to 2019 in Hyderabad, India
Musturi VenkataramanaDepartment of Biotechnology & Bioinformatics, School of Life Sciences, University of Hyderabad, Gachibowli, Hyderabad, Telangana, IndiaBackground: India is hyper-endemic for dengue virus infections circulating all four serotypes. But there are reports indicating only one or two of the serotypes dominates for certain period of time in few regions and causes significant morbidity and mortality. The reason for this uniqueness is not known. Hence this study was undertaken in order to understand the dynamics of dengue virus circulation in Hyderabad, India from 2014 to 2019.Methods: Viral RNA was isolated from the dengue virus infected serum samples using the Qiagen viral isolation kit. cDNA was synthesized using the reverse primer of the pre-Membrane region which was further amplified (511bp) by using the forward primer. Serotyping was carried by using the above template with serotype specific primers as described in earlier reports.Results: The data suggested the circulation of all four serotypes with equal proportion during the year 2014. 60% of the infections were co-infections with more than one serotype and caused severe dengue ie either dengue hemorrhagic (DHF) or dengue shock syndrome. But over the time, dengue virus serotype-1 emerged as single serotype circulating alone in 2019 in Hyderabad. The nucleotide sequence analysis indicated the significant mutations throughout the genome which might played crucial role in better adaptation and hence in circulating for the past five years.Conclusion: The adaptive mutations acquired by the dengue virus serotype-1, might played crucial role in better adaptation and hence in circulating for the past five years continuously circulating in Hyderabad, India.

ISSHID Abstract-135 CD4 COUNT- A measure of drug resistance in HIV patients who are on 1st line ART in a tertiary care hospital
A.Praveen, A.Surekha, A.Renuka Devi, B.Shanthi Reddy, R.HymavathiKurnool, A.P,518002Background: Measuring CD4 (T- Cell) count in HIV patients gives us a measure of the response to ART and also provides an assessment of disease progress. Virus mutations were noticed in patients who failed ART treatment. Other factors contributing to ART resistance were poor medication compliance, genetic differences in drug metabolism, improper nutrition, and poor socioeconomic status.Methods: A retrospective observational study was conducted to examine the 1st line ART resistance using CD4 count among ART users in government general hospital, Kurnool starting from the year 2014 to 2019. All the ART users were adults aged between 20-60 years. Patients who came for ART treatment, CD4 count was monitored every 6 months for a period of 5 and half yearsResults: A descriptive analysis of the data of 7,560 patients who were on ART was conducted. Out of 7,560 patients only 150 patients had shown resistance to 1st line ART i,e CD4 count <100cells/mm3. Among the 150 patients, 95 patients had a CD4 count <100cells/mm3 after 60 months on ART, 32 patients had a CD4 count <100 cells/mm3 after 24 months on ART and remaining 23 patients had a CD4 <100cells/mm3 after 12months on ART indicating resistance to 1st line ART. It was observed males showed predominance over females in ART resistance.Conclusion: This study shows that measuring CD4 count can be useful in the early detection of 1st line ART resistance .This could also help us to identify and monitor poor treatment adherence in HIV patients.

ISSHID Abstract-136 Re-emergence of diphtheria in Northwest-zone of Tamilnadu
Mythili Pradeep, S Rajesh, M Kavitha, T Sundararajan, R Vidhyarani, S DeepaDepartment of Microbiology, GMKMC,Salem,TamilnaduBackground: Diphtheria is one of the most threatful infectious disease especially in children with high fatality rate. Diphtheria has re-emerging probably due to pockets of unimmunisation and non-adherence to booster doses. From 2011-2015, India had the largest number of reported cases (18,350) followed by Indonesia ( 3203 ).Methods: This is a descriptive study, conducted in GMKMCH Salem.21 clinically suspected diphtheria cases had been admitted in our tertiary care centre during the period of oct-2018 to Aug-2019. Age group of the patients under 12 years.Specimens ( throat swabs ) were collected from diphtheria suspected cases and processed for staining and culture followed by establishment of pathogenicity with toxigenicity testing in reference lab.Results: Total number of cases studied- 21.Among 21 cases,5(3 males,2 females with mean age of 5 years who had missed DPT booster doses) were positive for direct gram stain and Albert stain.Preliminary report was given to the clinician immediately following which diphtheria antitoxin was administered to the patients. Culture results were positive.Serum samples and PTA isolates were sent to the reference lab (CMC Vellore) for toxigenicity testing and molecular characterization. All the 4 samples were toxic stains and TOX A gene positive (RT-PCR).Out of 5, 4 patients died.Conclusion: In the era of vaccination, diphtheria is re-emerging mainly because of lack of booster dose vaccination coverage. Booster doses are needed to ensure continuous protection.Ring immunisation to be done to prevent outbreak. Public should be instructed to vaccinate their children at appropriate age with correct doses.

ISSHID Abstract-143 Leprosy- is it really eliminated in India?
Cordelia Babitha, Maitreyi Parachuri, Murugan SundaramDepartment of Dermatology, Sri Ramachandra Institute of Higher Education and Research, Porur, Chennai, IndiaBackground: Leprosy is one of the oldest disease known to man, continues to be a major public health problem in India. Multidrug therapy has helped to achieve the elimination status of less than 1 case per 10,000 in December 2005. However there is a recent rise in the number of new cases being recorded. The objective of this study is to present the newly diagnosed leprosy cases between January 2019 to July 2019 in our hospital.Methods: In this case series 22 patients with clinical features suggestive of leprosy presented to the dermatology OPD between January 2019 to July 2019. All the patients were subjected to physical examination,slit skin smear and biopsy.Results: Among the 22 cases, 6 were female and 16 male and were categorized into Ridley-Jopling classification with 15 patients in borderline, 5 in lepromatous and 2 in tuberculoid spectrum. Type 1 reaction was seen in 4 patients and type 2 in 2 patients. Patients were started on WHO-MDT , those on reaction were managed with glucocorticoids. Screening and counseling of all household contacts were done.Conclusion: India accounts for 60 % of new cases being reported despite the prevalence being reduced from 5 million cases in 1998 to less than 2,00,000 in 2016. Long incubation period, lack of awareness, fear and stigma accounts for majority of hidden cases. Important measures like house to house surveys, screening of children and elderly, chemoprophylaxis to contacts and research of transmission and treatment will help to truly eliminate leprosy one day.

ISSHID Abstract-145 Are the Antenatal women susceptible to Rubella and measles? -A Seroprevalence study
Sherly Antony1, George Varghese1, Bilsa P M2, Reshma Mary Joseph3, Vindhuja Udayan2, Reeshma R Nair1, Reshmi K Pillai1, Kavya C Ravi1, Philip Mathew4, Mercy John Idikula1
1Department of Microbiology, Pushpagiri Institute of Medical Sciences and Research Centre, Thiruvalla, Kerala, India; 2Department of Medical Microbiology, Union Christian College, Aluva, Kerala, India; 3Department of Medical Microbiology, School of Health Sciences, University of Calicut, Malappuram, Kerala, India; 4Department of Community Medicine, Pushpagiri Institute of Medical Sciences and Research Centre, Thiruvalla, Kerala, IndiaBackground: Globally, MMR vaccine coverage has reduced the load of measles, mumps and rubella. However a recent surge in measles cases is observed. USA reporting its maximum cases ever since 1992, threatening its elimination status. In India, IDSP noted high case burden in the last three years which may be just the tip of the iceberg. As India, aims to eliminate measles and rubella by 2020, the susceptibility of the antenatal women in whom the infection can have adverse consequences was looked into.Methods: IgG antibodies to rubella and measles were assayed by ELISA (Euroimmun, Germany) on 75 sera received from Antenatal clinic. The seronegativity (95% confidence interval), cross-tabulated with age status using tests of proportions, Chi Square Test and Odds Ratio for association between age and seronegativity were analysed.Results: For measles, 59 participants were seropositive and 2 borderline while for rubella 60 were positive and 1 borderline. Seronegativity with 95% confidence interval for IgG to measles and rubella was 18.7 % (CI=9.7 to 27.7%). Most seronegatives were aged between 19-24 years. However, the association between age and seronegativity were not statistically significant. (p= 0.061 measles and 0.98 rubella).Conclusion: Kerala state despite its good health indices has 18.7% seronegativity to measles and rubella which could be clinically significant. It represents 7,453 mothers of total antenatal population in the state (37,264). Hence to achieve WHO’s elimination target of 2020, it is of high priority that women in child bearing age are added to the existing MR vaccine campaign

ISSHID Abstract-155 Candida Biofilms: A study of biofilm formation among various Candida species at a tertiary care hospital
Manohar. M. Reddy, A. Renuka Devi, A. Surekha, B. Shanthi Reddy, R. HymavathiDepartment of Microbiology, Kurnool Medical College, Kurnool AP IndiaBackground: Biofilms are formed when microorganisms attach irreversibly to inert and living surfaces. Since the surfaces are non shedding, these surfaces provide an ideal place for colonization by biofilm forming microorganism.Methods: Samples of urine, pus, blood, cerebrospinal fluid, body fluids, oral and ear swabs from patients were processed in the microbiology laboratory. Different candida species grown on culture media were identified, isolated and inoculated into microtitre plate wells. Biofilm production in microtitre wells was detected by measuring their optical density with an ELISA reader.Results: A total of 64 various candida species were isolated from all samples. Among the various candida species isolated, 24 were Candida albicans and 17 formed biofilms, 21 were Candida tropicalis and 14 formed biofilms, 13 were Candida krusei and 11 formed biofilms, 4 were Candida parapsilosis and 3 formed biofilms, 2 were Candida glabrata and none formed biofilms.Conclusion: A thorough knowledge of biofilm formation of candida species will help us in an early diagnosis and treatment of candida infection, preventing its further spread and improving patient outcome.

ISSHID Abstract-158 Structural analysis of NS2B/NS3 proteases of flaviriridae and novel inhibitor design
Ramakrishnan C1, Velmurugan D2, Gromiha MM1,3
1Department of Biotechnology, Bhupat and Jyoti Mehta School of Biosciences, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai - 600 036, INDIA; 2Centre of Advanced Study in Crystallography and Biophysics, University of Madras, Chennai, India; 3Advanced Computational Drug Discovery Unit, Tokyo Tech World Research Hub Initiative (WRHI), Institute of Innovative Research, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 4259 Nagatsuta-cho, Midori-ku, Yokohama, JAPANBackground: Dengue, West Nile and Zika viruses belong to flaviviridae family and cause life threatening fevers. These three viruses express the polyprotein encoded by 5'-C-prM-E-NS1-NS2A-NS2B-NS3-NS4A-NS4B-NS5-3' gene for their life cycle in the host cells in common. This polyprotein is cleaved into the active protein components with the aid of protease activity of NS2B/NS3pro complex. Thus, the NS2B/NS3 is considered as a potent target for designing inhibitors against these viruses.Methods: We have performed a structural analysis of NS2B/NS3pro complex using molecular modeling and dynamics simulations and explained the structure-function relationship of this complex based on the similarity and differences in the structural features. Further, we have employed screening of protease inhibitor chemical space using high-throughput virtual screening.Results: We have obtained the structures of substrate peptide (GLKR’GGAK) bound NS2B/NS3 protease of DENV, WNV and Zika virusus. These complex structures represent the model for the protease activity in cleaving the substrate peptide and it is robust for designing high affinity and low risk compounds with specific as well as non-specific protease inhibitors. We also present some of the compounds selected from the in silico studies as promising inhibitors against DENV and WNV proteases.Conclusion: Our results provide a strong platform for structure/ensemble-based screening of large chemical libraries and also to prepare NS2B/NS3pro focussed compound libraries. Further, NS2B/NS3pro specific/non-specific inhibitors can also be designed based on our pipeline. Together, our computational method helps designing of potent antiviral drugs, efficiently and rapidly.

ISSHID Abstract-164 Seroprevalence of Hepatitis C Virus infection in haemodialysis patients in a tertiary care hospital
G. Mounika, A. Renuka Devi, A. Surekha, B. Nagajyothi, J.VijaylakshmiDepartment of Microbiology, Kurnool Medical College, Kurnool AP IndiaBackground: Hepatitis C virus is an RNA virus and a known cause of infection transmitted in patients undergoing haemodialysis. The source of infection stems from improper washing and disinfecting equipment used in haemodialysis. Infection can also occur due to improper hygiene practises while handling the dialysis equipment and patient. Transmission through contaminated blood while treating anaemic patients is another source of HCV infection. HCV infection has been implicated in the pathogenesis of glomerulonephritis leading to worsening of the already compromised kidney. Therefore prevention of HCV transmission and early diagnosis and treatment of HCV is very essential.Methods: This is a prospective observational study conducted for 3 months done to identify HCV patients on hemodialysis in the geographical location ( Kurnool, AP). Blood samples were collected and screened for HCV antibodies by ELISA for all patients who came for hemodialysis. Ethical clearance was obtained and prior consent from patients was taken before testing.Results: Among 139 patients who were on hemodialysis 104 patients were males and 35 patients were females with a mean age of 51±15 years. 4 patients were identified as having HCV infection. All 4 patients were old cases of HCV infection. No new cases were found in the time period of the studyConclusion: This study looks at the disease burden and rate of transmission of HCV in hemodialysis patients. Use of proper protocols and infection control practices prevents the incidence of Hepatitis-C infection in haemodialysis patients.

ISSHID Abstract-168 Role of antimicrobial peptides against the biofilm formation in MRSA strains
Thenmozhi Ramalingam1, Beema Shafreen Rajamohamed2, Thajuddin Nooruddin1
1Department of Microbiology, Bharathidasan University, Tiruchirappalli, Tamilnadu, India; 2Department of Biotechnology, Alagappa University, Karaikudi, Tamilnadu, IndiaBackground: Biofilm formation imposes a major threat in clinical manifestations. Still Methicillin Resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) is a greater challenge to the physicians in controlling its emergence. Apart from controlling MRSA biofilms by antibiotics, we have approached with a novel antimicrobial peptide (AMP), Chensinin-1 (SPDC-1) against its biofilm formation.Methods: About fifty patients and their nasal swabs has been taken for the study. The isolated MRSA isolates were subjected to the study of biofilm forming potential by crystal violet assay. These biofilm formers were treated with SPDC-1.Results: Out of fifty patients screened, eighteen turned to be positive for MRSA. From the 18 MRSA strains 14 formed biofilms at varying degrees. N7 and N23 two best biofilm formers have been chosen for further studies on par with MRSA ATCC 33591. The biofilms appear to be thick and very dense in their microcolony formation, which was supported by Light microscopy, Scanning Electron microscopy and Confocal microscopy. The biofilm formers were treated with SPDC-1at various concentrations from 5 to 20 μM. At least concentration of 5 μM the SPDC-1 showed efficient disintegration of biofilm MRSA strains. Further assays also supported the efficiency of AMP against biofilm forming MRSA strains.Conclusion: Hence this study showed the efficacy of antimicrobial peptide against biofilm forming MRSA stains. This AMP has no side effects and emergence of resistance to AMPs has not been reported so far.

ISSHID Abstract-188 Evaluation of diagnostic efficiency of nested PCR in the diagnosis of Herpes simplex virus-2 (HSV-2) infection
Deepa V, Rayvathy BDepartment of Microbiology, Dr. ALM Post Graduate Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, University of Madras, Taramani, Chennai- 600 113, IndiaBackground: Herpes simplex virus 2, causes genital ulcer disease (GUD) and the patients present with genital pain and sores. The diagnosis of HSV 2 infection is primarily clinical as Tzanck smear lacks sensitivity and specificity. Serology helps in screening but unreliable for diagnosis and culture is difficult to perform in all laboratories. So, molecular methods are much promising for efficient diagnosis. Hence, this study proposes to use a nested PCR assay for the diagnosis of HSV-2 infection from genital swabs of patients with GUD and compares its diagnostic efficiency with that of real-time PCR.Methods: A total of 40 genital ulcer swab samples collected from GUD patients attending a tertiary Sexually transmitted infections (STI) clinic were included in this study. DNA was extracted using the Nucleospin virus kit and nested PCR assay was performed using specific primer sets targeting POL gene (163-bp) of HSV-2. The same samples were analyzed using real time-PCR with specific probe and primers targeting the glycoprotein G gene of HSV-2.Results: 23/40 samples were positive by nested PCR and 27/40 samples were positive by real-time PCR. It was found that nested PCR had a sensitivity and specificity of 55.5% and 46.1% respectively. The positive and negative predictive values were 68.2% and 33.3% respectively.Conclusion: Thus, the evaluation of diagnostic efficiency of nested PCR in HSV -2 diagnosis shows that it is not a good diagnostic test as it has poor sensitivity and specificity."

ISSHID Abstract-229 Detection of Non typeable Haemophilus influenza by P6 (OMP) gene from Respiratory samples
D.Danis Vijay1 S.Jayanthi1, N.Meenakshi, S.H.ShifaMeharaj1, A.Sujhithra3, J.Perumal1
1Department of Microbiology, Chettinad Hospital and Research Institute , Chettinad Academy of Research & Education, Kelambakkam, Tamilnadu, India; 2Department of Respiratory Medicine, Chettinad Hospital and Research Institute, Chettinad Academy of Research & Education, Kelambakkam, Tamilnadu, India; 3Department of Allied Health Science, Chettinad Academy of Research & Education, Kelambakkam, Tamilnadu, IndiaBackground: Nasopharyngeal NTHI colonization leads to the risk of respiratory tract infections. Although NTHI related diseases can be successfully treated with the commonly used β lactam antibiotics such as ampicillin or amoxicillin, resistance among the bacteria is rising increasingly through different mechanisms such as β lactamase or through modified penicillin - binding protein with low affinity for β lactams. Aim:To identify the P6 gene from the respiratory samples and to differentiate the Typeable and Non-typeable Haemophilus influenza.Methods: The prospective bacteriological survey of 75 sputum and nasopharyngeal swab were screened for P6 gene suspected with history of respiratory tract infection. Simultaneous phenotypic and genotypic confirmation were done for typeable and Nontypeable Haemophilus influenza by 16SrRNA and P6 gene and study was done for period of six months from January 2019 to June 2019.Results: Nearly 75 respiratory samples (63 were sputum sample and 12 Nasopharyngeal swab) were screened for presence of H.influenza. Phenotypic confirmation was done following isolation of the organisms and 15 showed cultures positive. Among the 75 samples, 10 nasopharyngeal swab and 5 sputum samples were positive for P6 gene.Conclusion: The outer membrane protein P6 gene is considered as the good genetic marker for detection of the Haemophilus influenza at the earliest. Molecular detection tests could complement culture-based tests by strengthening their surveillance.

ISSHID Abstract-242 Pluronic based Niosomal formulation for topical delivery of anti-infective drug secnidazole
Udaya Sakthi M, Ramyadevi D, Vedha Hari BNDepartment of Pharmaceutical Technology, School of Chemical & Biotechnology, SASTRA Deemed University, Thanjavur, Tamil Nadu, IndiaBackground: Topical anti-infective therapy by conventional dosage forms has limitations such as short residence time, degradation of the drug at mucosal surfaces, etc. To overcome these limitations and enhance the therapeutic efficacy, vesicular systems were considered as they permeate effectively through skin dermis. With this background, the objective of our study was to prepare niosomes of Secnidazole with Pluronic F127 owing to its non-ionic surfactant property and explore its use in topical delivery of anti-infective agents.Methods: Secnidazole niosomes were prepared by the Modified ether injection method and the Thin-film hydration method in the presence and absence of cholesterol. The physicochemical properties of the developed noisomes were evaluated through particle size analysis, thermogravimetric analysis combined with differential scanning calorimetric analysis, X-ray diffraction studies, drug content, skin permeation, Transmission electron microscope, confocal laser scanning microscopy and in-vitro drug release studies.Results: The formulations devoid of cholesterol showed required niosomes formation and were considered for further evaluations. The vesicle size of optimized formulation was found to be 396 nm with the PDI value of 0.5. The interaction studies revealed high drug stability. The niosomes demonstrated the faster release of Secnidazole due to the presence of Pluronic surfactant. The Confocal Laser microscopic study confirmed the spherical nature and improved skin permeability of the Secnidazole niosomes.Conclusion: Secnidazole niosomes prepared by the thin-film hydration method were stable for 90 days without any particle aggregation or sedimentation. Hence, Pluronic F127 based Secnidazole niosomes could be an efficient carrier for topical anti-infective therapy.

ISSHID Abstract-251 Altered systemic levels of acute phase and antimicrobial proteins and post treatment modulation in tuberculous lymphadenitis
Gokul Raj Kathamuthu1,2, Kadar Moideen1, Rathinam Sridhar3, Dhanaraj Baskaran2, Subash Babu1,4
1National Institutes of Health-NIRT-International Center for Excellence in Research, Chennai, India; 2National Institute for Research in Tuberculosis (NIRT), Chennai, India; 3Government Stanley Medical Hospital, Chennai, India; 4Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USABackground: Pulmonary tuberculosis is characterized by elevated levels of acute phase (APPs) and antimicrobial proteins (AMPs). However, data on the association of APPs and AMPs with tuberculous lymphadenitis (TBL) is scarce.Methods: We have examined the systemic levels of APPs and AMPs in TBL (n=44) and latent tuberculosis (LTB, n=44) individuals at baseline and in TBL before and after the completion of anti-tuberculosis treatment (ATT, n=44). We measured the plasma levels of alpha-2-macroglobulin (⍺-2MG), serum amyloid A (SAA), C-reactive protein (CRP), haptoglobin (Hp), human beta defensin 2 (HBD-2), granulysin, cathelicidin (LL-37) and human neutrophil peptide1-3 (HNP1-3) by ELISA. We also examined the association of these proteins with TBL lymph node (LN) size and multiple (M) versus single (S) LN involvement. Finally, we have also examined the pre and post-treatment modulation of APP and AMPs in TBL. The statistically significant differences were analysed using GraphPad PRISM 8.Results: TBL individuals exhibit increased plasma levels of APPs (⍺-2MG, SAA1, CRP, elevated (HBD-2) and diminished (granulysin, HNP1-3) AMPs when compared to LTB individuals. In contrast, none of these proteins was significantly associated with LN size and multiple versus single LN involvement indicating a lack of association with disease severity. Following ATT, the systemic levels of ⍺-2MG, CRP, Hp, HBD-2 were significantly diminished and granulysin and HNP1-3 were significantly elevated when compared to pre-treatment levels.Conclusion: Thus, altered levels of APPs and AMPs at baseline corroborates the presence of systemic inflammation and enhanced immune activation and their reversal after ATT indicates modulation after treatment in TBL disease.

ISSHID Abstract-283 Identification of ligand receptor interaction across blood brain barrier in dengue pathogenesis
Durga Bethala, Shashikant VaidyaHaffkine Institute for Training, Research and Testing, MumbaiBackground: Clinical evidences suggests that blood brain barrier (BBB) may be compromised during DENV infection; however, it is not clear whether the damage is due to the infection or to the inflammatory response generated by the BBB cells. Other neurotropic flaviviruses such as Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) are also known for neurological damage, it uses the bloodstream to enter nerve tissue where it infects cells of the neurovascular unit. While the rabies virus chooses the retro-grade axonal route to infect the neuronal cells. Both JEV and RABV affect the cells from neurovascular unit in different ways resulting into BBB damage. Our aim is to identify receptors binding to DENV envelope protein (DEP), compared with other neurotropic viruses like JEV and RABV using in silico model. This information will allow us to understand impact of dengue virus on our complex nervous system.Methods: DEP sequence was submitted in SWISS-MODEL software the energy minimized stable structure was developed. This structure was further subjected to protein-protein interaction with brain endothelial membrane proteins using PATCHDOCK and FIREDOCK softwares. The structure with lowest binding energy score was selected to identify important amino acids at the interface binding region.Results: On the basis of lowest energy score plasma lemma vesicle associated protein, annexin A6 and vacuolar protein sorting associated protein-13C has shown higher interaction to dengue envelope protein as compared to other viruses.Conclusion: We can compare the in-silico data of dengue envelope protein interaction with brain endothelial membrane receptor with the in-vitro study

ISSHID Abstract-285 Pulmonary tuberculosis: a rare occurrence presenting as diffuse alveolar hemorrhage
Raghav raj J, Anantha SubramanianKauvery Hospital, Chennai, IndiaBackground: pulmonary tuberculosis is commonly encountered in daily practice with varied presentation. Diffuse alveolar hemorrhage is an exceedingly rare manifestation of pulmonary tuberculosis with few case reports.Case report: A 38 year old female presented with hemoptysis, progressive dyspnea for seven days. On examination her respiratory rate was 32/min with room air saturation was 88%. On systemic examination she had crepitations. Her chest xray showed diffuse nonhomogeneous infiltrates with reticular shadows. Her baseline blood investigations were normal with a exception of hemogram A computed tomography thorax was done on 1st day of admission, which showed bilateral diffuse ground glass opacity. In view of hemoptysis, radiological and laboratory (anemia) picture, a provisional diagnosis of diffuse alveolar hemorrhage was made and she was started on intravenous methyl prednisone. work up for autoimmune/coagulation disorders was done with ANA, ANCA ,ANTI-GBM, APLA antibodies, PT/APTT being non contributory. She was taken up for bronchoscopy following clinical stabilization and Bronchoalveolar lavage was taken, which showed Acid Fast Bacilli, Genexpert Positive and cytology revealing hemosiderin laden macrophages. She was initiated on anti tuberculosis therapy, was discharged with the same and tapering dose of steroids. On follow up she had no episodes of hemoptysis and radiological clearance. Consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of her dataDiscussion: DAH is a medical emergency, It often occurs with vasculitis, autoimmune disorders, drugs. Pulmonary tuberculosis has been associated with it less often. The present case highlights the possibility of TB being a differential diagnosis and the improvement following therapy.

ISSHID Abstract-309 Comparison of Multi-drug resistant Tuberculosis prevalence in HIV and non-HIV infected patients in a tertiary care center
R.Monica, PAT.JagatheeswaryDepartment of Microbiology, Saveetha Medical College, Thandalam, Chennai, IndiaBackground: Multidrug-resistant tuberculosis is one of the most important HIV-related opportunistic infections. The study aims to assess the prevalence of multi-drug resistant Mycobacterium species from suspected pulmonary tuberculosis (PTB) cases amongst newly diagnosed HIV positive patients and compare it with non-HIV patients attending a tertiary care center.Methods: A retrospective study was conducted from January 2018 to July 2019. Sputum samples were collected from patients who were suspected to have PTB and 261 of them were found to sputum positive for acid-fast bacilli (AFB) by Fluorochrome and Ziehl- Neelson staining. The sputum samples of these patients were subjected to the detection of Mycobacterium spp. by Cartridge-based nucleic acid amplification test(CBNAAT) and also checked for rifampicin and isoniazid(RIF) resistance. Serum samples were obtained from these patients and tested for antibodies to HIV by ELISA and CLIA methods.Results: Among the 3265 patients screened for PTB, 261(7.9%) were found to be positive for AFB. All of these 261(7.99%) patients were screened by CBNAAT and were found to be positive for Mycobacterium tuberculosis and 5(4.21%) were found to have genes coding to RIF resistance. Among this 261, 3(2.68%) patients were found to be reactive for antibodies to HIV and also found to have gene coding for RIF resistance.Conclusion: In developing countries with a high prevalence of tuberculosis in the general population, the possibility of incidental tuberculosis in patients with HIV should always be considered. Universal Drug Susceptibility Testing by molecular methods should be followed especially in HIV co-infected TB patients in tertiary care centers."

ISSHID Abstract-312 Novel disease target identification in Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv by insilico subtractive genomics approach
Srinivasan.S1, Sasikala.S1, Saradhai.P1,Mumtaj.P2
1PG & Research Department of Microbiology and Biotechnology, Presidency College(Aut), Chennai, Tamilnadu, india; 2Bioinformatics Infrastructure Facility centre of DBT, Presidency College(Aut), Chennai, Tamilnadu, IndiaBackground: Multi-drug resistant (MDR) and extensively-drug resistant (XDR) strains has emerged all over the world including India. Mycobacterium tuberculosis causes Tuberculosis a highly infectious disease and has developed resistance against the first line and second line drugsMethods: Complete proteome sequences of Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv, retrieved from NCBI, were subjected to BLAST-P, against DEG and in NCBI server for the screening of essential genes and proteins, respectively. Non homologous sequences were selected.Non homologue essential proteins sub cellular localization was identified by P SORT server and metabolic pathway analysis was done by KEGG Automatic Annotation Server (KAAS). Comparative analysis of the metabolic pathways of the host and pathogen was performed by using KEGG pathway database. Modeling of the target proteins were performed using Swiss Modeller and were validated using PROCHECK. Non bonded interactions between different atoms types were measured by ERRAT program. RMSD and RMSF were calculated for modelled structures. Functional active-sites were identified through CASTp.Results: By subtractive genomics approach, 947 non homologous genes were identified. About 250 membrane localized proteins were identified. Three dimensional model of drug targets were generated through identified templates along with fold fitting. Fold recognition was done through GenThreader and LOMETS server. Generated 3D model of target proteins were checked by Ramachandran plot through PROCHECK programme.Conclusion: Use of the DEG database is more useful method for identification of essential genes. The present study has thus led to the identification of membrane proteins that can be targeted for effective drug designing.

ISSHID Abstract-315 Dengue In Pregnancy: A Clinical Dilemma In Diagnosis
Nidhi Sharma, Archana Prakash, Shanthi Ethiraj, Hussaina SheikhSaveetha Institute of Medical and Technical Sciences, Chennai, 602105, IndiaBackground: The vector of dengue fever (caused by 4 closely related serotypes of Flavivirus), A. aegypti is endemic in South East Asia. Dengue in pregnancy has a mortality of 20%. The plasma leak from intra vascular to extravascular compartment results in shock that progress as uncompensated shock (Dengue Shock syndrome). Second cause of mortality is hemorrhagic manifestations (Dengue Hemorrhagic fever).Methods: Eleven pregnant women with dengue(confirmed with Dengue ELIZA IgG and IgM and NS1 Ag) were treated by intravenous normal saline (loading and maintenance). Intravenous dextrose, intramuscular injections, steroids, NSAIDS and Cariprill were avoided. Paracetamol infusions and platelet transfusions were given. Daily blood counts, input output charting, amniotic fluid index and nonstress test was done. Induction of labor was avoided.Results: The mean duration of febrile phase, critical phase and recovery phase was 4.54+1.16, 4.64+1.49 and 7.64+0.88 days (mean total duration of illness was 16.91+2.31). There was a significant fall in platelet count on day 4(t= 5.41,SD= 0.517,p<. 0001) There was no significant fall in leukocytes (t= 0.220,SD= 1.35,p=0.83). There was no significant rise in hematocrit (t=-0.904,SD=2.12,p=0.38). The mean pulse pressure was 34+8.1mm Hg. Tourniquet sign was positive in 8/11 patients.Conclusion: Dengue fever in pregnancy is associated with thrombocytopenia. There is no leucopenia (relative leukocytosis of pregnancy). There is hemoconcentration and reduced pulse pressure due to decreased intravascular volume and leaky capillaries, however these changes cannot be detected in pregnancy (physiological hemodilution and increased intravascular volume). Management is antipyretics, strictly monitored intravenous therapy with platelet transfusion reserved for critical phases.

ISSHID Abstract-337 Quorum Sensing Analysis of Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Effect of Bacteriocin against Biofilm Formation in Pseudomonas aeruginosa
S.Priya Dharsini1, G.Bhuvaneshwari2, M.Kalyani3Department of Microbiology, Saveetha Medical College and Hospital, Thandalam, Kanchipuram Dist, Tamilnadu, IndiaBackground:Pseudomonas aeruginosa is the commonest causative agent of Hospital Acquired Infection (HAI). It shows higher resistance to disinfectants and antibiotics due to production of Biofilm. There are various reviews on antibacterial effect of herbal extracts and nanoparticles against this superbug. Thus, this study aims to prove the effectiveness of bacteriocin against P.aeruginosa which may help in benefiting health care centre.Methods: 100 strains of P.aeruginosa were collected from Saveetha hospital, Department of Microbiology for a time period of 6 months . Strains were identified by conventional methods. Bacteriocin was extracted by ammonium sulphate precipitation method and efficiency was checked by paper disc diffusion assay. Biofilm formation and quorum sensing analysis was performed by Microtitre plate method and Thin Layer Chromatography (TLC) respectively.Results: In this study, 91% of P.aeruginosa strains were strong, 8% were intermediate and 1% were weak biofilm producers. From TLC analysis, 67% of the strains produced Acyl Homoserine Lactone molecules. Out of which, 49% has shown unknown analytes of Retardation factor (Rf) value greater than 1. The Rf values identified were 3 unsubstituted C4 (5%), 3 unsubstituted C6 (4%), 3 oxo C8 (3%), 3 oxo C4 (3%), 3 oxo C6 (2%), 3 oxo C1 (1%). Biofilm production before and after bacteriocin exposure was proved significant by paired t-test.Conclusion: Quorum sensing molecules were confirmed to play a major role in biofilm formation. As bacteriocin was effective in controlling the biofilm formation, it can be incorporated in any surface disinfectant which helps in controlling transmission of superbugs.

ISSHID Abstract-339 Biofilm formation, Antifungal susceptibility profiling and Polymerase chain reaction analysis of Candida albicans isolated from various clinical samples in tertiary care hospital
Rajeswari.M.R1,2, Kalyani.M2, Hanumanthappa.A.R1 Vijayaraghavan. R2, Lava R1
1Department of Microbiology, J. J .M. Medical College, Davangere, Karnataka, India; 2Saveetha Medical College, SIMATS, Chennai, Tamilnadu, IndiaBackground: Candida species have emerged as main pathogens in both invasive and mucosal infections and show resistance to antifungal drugs. Knowledge of resistance to conventional antifungals and newer antifungal agents could support in better disease management and hence this study was carried outTo determine the biofilm formation, antifungal susceptibility and to find out the genotypic distribution of Candida albicans in a tertiary care centerMethods: This cross sectional study was done from July 2017 to June 2018 at J.J.M.Medical college Davangere. After getting Institutional Ethical Committee approval, 126 C.albicans were recovered from all clinical samples received in Microbiology laboratory. Biofilm formation was done by visual tube method. Antifungal susceptibility to Amphotericin B, Fluconazole, Voriconazole, Flucytosine and Caspofungin were performed by E – Test and genotyping was done by amplifying DNA fragment located in the 25S rDNA bearing the potential Group I introns.Results: All 126 C. albicans isolates from different clinical samples were grouped into three genotypes by 25S rDNA. 68% belonged to genotype A, 22% to C and 10% to genotype B. Biofilm formation was observed more in Genotype A(69.8%) Resistance to fluconazole was observed in 16.3% of genotype A, 7.7% to B, and 3.7% to C. All strains belonging to genotype B and C were sensitive to other four antifungals except Genotype AConclusion: This study clearly shows that Genotype A is more virulent and resistant to antifungal drugs. Genotyping definitely helps in understanding the epidemiology, virulence and drug resistance of Candida species.

ISSHID Abstract-346 Detection and typing of circulating Influenza A and B virus by real time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT PCR) at a tertiary care centre in Chennai
Krithika Gopalakrishnan1, Divya Katta1, Ramya Barani1, Sudhabharathi Reju1, Monika Mani1, Preetam Arthur2, Shuba S3, Usha Rani G4, Padma Srikanth1
1Department of Microbiology, Sri Ramachandra Institute of Higher Education and Research, Chennai, India; 2Department of General Medicine, Sri Ramachandra Institute of Higher Education and Research, Chennai, India; 3Department of Paediatrics, Sri Ramachandra Institute of Higher Education and Research, Chennai, India; 4Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, Sri Ramachandra Institute of Higher Education and Research, Chennai, IndiaBackground: Influenza accounts for 114667 cases and 8543 deaths in India over past decade. There were periodical occurrences of influenza in Chennai. Real time PCR is gold standard test recommended for influenza diagnosis. This study aims to determine Influenza A, B and H1N1 in participants with influenza-like illness (ILI) attending tertiary care center during recent outbreak.Methods: This is prospective study conducted from 2018-2019. A total of 1755 throat swabs collected from participants with ILI. RNA was extracted using QIAamp Viral RNA Mini kit. Real time PCR was performed to detect Pandemic Influenza A/H1N1/2009 using ABI/HT/FAST/7900 (Applied Biosystems, USA). Influenza A negative samples tested for Influenza B by real time PCR using Artus Infl/H1LC/RG RT-PCR kit (Qiagen, Germany).Results: Among 1755 samples analyzed, detection rate of H1N1 and Influenza A were 33% (n=575) and 13% (n=225) respectively. Paediatric age-group positivity rate was 27% for H1N1 and 25% for Influenza A. H1N1 detection rate in women of reproductive age was 41%. Increased detection rate was seen from October to December for H1N1 and September to December for influenza A. Among samples tested negative for Influenza A (n=80), the detection rate of Influenza B was 18%. Fever (90%) was the predominant symptom followed by cough (88%), sore throat (51%), chills &rigor (45%).Conclusion: Co-circulation of Influenza A and B apart H1N1 depicts need for its detection for timely treatment and preventing complications. Increased positivity rate of H1N1 and influenza A in children and pregnant women indicates need for change in vaccination policy"

ISSHID Abstract-347 Nuclear factor kappa B p65 detection by real-time PCR among HIV-1 infected individuals and healthy controls
Sivasubramaniyan.G1, Rajesh Kannangai2, Ganesh Venkatraman3, Gopalsamy1, Sudha Bharathi1, Ramya Barani1, Monika Mani1, Padma Srikanth1
1Department of Microbiology, Sri Ramachandra Institute of Higher Education and Research, Porur, Chennai; 2Department of Clinical Virology, Christian Medical College, Vellore; 3Department of Human Genetics, Sri Ramachandra Institute of Higher Education and Research, Porur, ChennaiBackground: Nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-κB p65) is the transcription factor which helps in the replication of the HIV-1 virus by binding the site of NF-κB p65 in long terminal repeat (LTR) region of the virus. The aim of the study is to standardize and identify the expression of NF kappa B p65 by Real-time PCR among HIV-1 infected individuals and compare with viral loadMethods: HIV-1 RNA levels done using Artus HI virus-1 RG PCR kit (Qiagen, Germany). PBMC were separated from EDTA blood using Ficoll-Hypaque. RNA extraction was done using RNase mini kit (Qiagen, USA). cDNA was converted (Invitrogen, USA) and estimated using Nanodrop. Relative quantification of NF-κB p65 was done by using Power SYBR Green Master Mix kit (Thermo Fisher).Results: A total of eight samples were included in the study, four were HIV-1 infected individuals and 4 were controls. Among HIV-1 participants, three had high plasma HIV-1 RNA level (>1000 copies/ml) and one had low HIV-1 RNA (650 copies/ml). Increased NF-κB p65 expression was observed in participant with high plasma RNA level (2-∆∆Ct range16-73) in contrast to participant with low plasma RNA level (2-∆∆Ct-6). We observed increased level of NF-κB p65 expression in a participant who had co-infection with CMV despite low HIV-1 RNA plasma level.Conclusion: This is the first study to report detection of NF-κB p65 by SYBR green assay among HIV-1 individuals. Estimation of NF-κB p65 by real time PCR provides future prospective therapy of HIV-1 to suppress viral load by NF-κB inhibitors.

ISSHID Abstract-380 Early detection of CMV by real-time quantitative PCR targeting immediate gene-ppUL83 in patients with active infection
Ezhilarasi . V1, Yazhini . P1, Ramya Barani1, Sudha Bharathi R1 , Jayakumar. M2 , Padmasani. L, Padma Srikanth1
1Department of Microbiology, Sri Ramachandra Institute of Higher Education and Research, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India; 2Department Nephrology, Sri Ramachandra Institute of Higher Education and Research, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, IndiaBackground: CMV belongs to herpes group of DNA virus, causes childhood infection and establishes latency in cells and organs. Though several genes (glycoprotein B (gB) and H (gH) DNA polymerase gene UL54, UL 126 etc) used for diagnosis, detection of active CMV using immediate (ppUL83)gene is useful to initiate early treatment. The aim of this study is early detection of CMV DNA by real-time qPCR.Methods: Study participants who were suspected for CMV were enrolled. Blood/saliva/urine were collected and DNA were extracted by Qiagen DNA kit and quantitative real-time PCR was performed by TaqMan chemistry targeting ppUL83 using appropriate controls. The lower detection limit is <50 copies/ml. Amplification and analysis were done in SDS software (V2: 2.2; ABI 7900 HT).Results: A total of 308 participants were enrolled (January 2016 to August 2019). Among the total, 57.5 % (n=177) were male and 42.5% (n=131) were female. About 52% of participants were 18-60 years, 21% (n=66) in 1-18 years and 20% with <1 year. Majority of CMV observed in pediatric patients 50% (n=20/40), post renal transplant recipients-PRTR 42% (n=40/95), general medicine 40% (n=10/25), hematology 38% (n=3/8), gastroenterology 33% (n=10/30), pulmonology 29% (n=2/7),both neurology & rheumatology 23% (n=3/13) and neonatology 19% (n=14/75). Patients who tested positive were initiated with appropriate treatment.Conclusion: CMV causes infection in immunocompromised and PRTR’s. In our study, majority of CMV noted in pediatrics & PRTR’s. Early detection of active CMV using active gene like ppUL83 can prevent end organ disease and other outcomes by initiating preemptive therapy

ISSHID Abstract-383 Diagnostic Analysis of Neisseria gonorrhoeae (NG) using Foldscope microscope: An inexpensive and point-of-care solution for screening microbes
Uma Chaudhry, Sujata Adhana and Rajnish KumarBhaskaracharya College of Applied Sciences, University of Delhi, Sector-2, Phase-I, Dwarka, New Delhi-110075, INDIABackground: Foldscope Microscope, developed by Dr. Manu Prakash at Stanford University, has seen tremendous applications in the recent past. Being a relatively cost-effective (under $1.00) microscope made of paper, it could offer an alternative for diagnostic roles. It would be especially advantageous in resource poor regions of the world. We procured several foldscopes and assembled them (“fold on the dotted lines”) taking help from our under-graduate students. We analysed their application as a diagnostic tool for detecting N. gonorrhoeae, which causes a sexually transmitted disease - Gonorrhoea. There are large number of morbidity cases of patients infected by the organism.Methods: Pure cultures of NG were procured from Safdarjung Hospital, New Delhi, India and evaluated using Gram Staining procedures. The idea is to standardise a diagnostic method which could be used at home as handy as a pregnancy detection kit.Results: Preliminary studies clearly indicated presence of gram negative diplococci, characteristics feature of NG, using foldscopes. Further validation is required using patient samples directly. Speaking with physicians at the hospital, it was realized that most of the patients were asymptomatic and would consult doctor only when serious symptoms were observed.Conclusion: The assay would help asymptomatic patients to evaluate themselves routinely for any infection. If the entire approach proves to be effective, it could help in developing powerful new way of routinely and almost immediately identifying contaminating microbes at the bedside. Moreover, successful imaging using cell phone would allow results to be shared with their physicians in a timely manner.

ISSHID Abstract-387 Gut microbiota and its influence on Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus
Shwathi Suresh Kumar1, Sribal Selvarajan1, Premalatha Pushpanathan1, Krishna G. Seshadri2, Padma Srikanth1
1Department of Microbiology, Sri Ramachandra Institute of Higher Education and Research, Chennai, India; 2Department of Endocrinology, Sri Ramachandra Institute of Higher Education and Research, Chennai, IndiaBackground: In India, 72 million people suffer from Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). This study was conducted to identify the composition of gut microbiota among T2DM and healthy controls and to correlate with Monocyte chemoattractant protein‑1 (MCP‑1) levels.Methods: Stool and blood samples along with their clinical details and diet history were collected from healthy controls (n=10) and T2DM (n=10). Bacterial DNA was extracted from stool samples and amplified using fusion primers. Metagenomic analysis was performed using Ion Torrent Sequencing platform. Human MCP1 enzyme linked immunosorbent assay was performed on 17 serum samples.Results: Phylum Proteobacteria-73% was abundant in T2DM and Firmicutes-69% in controls. The mean MCP1 levels among T2DM (256.5+106.1pg/ml) were significantly higher than controls (89.03+42.1 pg/ml) [P=0.0013]. Escherichia-13%, Serratia-10%, Citrobacter-9%, Faecalibacterium-7%, Enterobacter-6% (gram negative bacteria) were abundant in T2DM while Faecalibacterium-23%, Eubacterium-16%, Clostridium-10%, Vibrio-7% (gram positive bacteria) were predominant among controls. Escherichia was found to be increased 25 folds with MCP-1levels >200 than in ≤200. Escherichia (37%) and Vibrio (18%) were predominant among T2DM vegetarian and non-vegetarian participants respectively. In addition, we observed the shift in the genera towards gram negative bacteria (GNB) preponderance among post reproductive control women.Conclusion: The higher gylcemic index associated with increased MCP-1 levels revealed the predominance of Escherichia.

ISSHID Abstract-395 Role of CD4 count in PLHIV
Thentral , Kavitha , Rajesh , Sundarajan , Vidhya Rani, Deepa , Neelaveni, Nirmala, Anandashankari, ThirunavukarasuMicrobiology, Dr.MGR University, Salem, IndiaBackground: CD4 cell count has been essential component of HIV treatment and care programme since it provides the measurement of patients immune status, risk for opportunistic infections. It remains an important test for diagnostic decision making particularly in patient with advanced diseaseMethods: This is a Cross sectional study in the department of Microbiology GMKMCH , Salem from April 2019 to August 2019. The persons who have been newly diagnosed with HIV infection in ICTC are tested for CD4 count by FACS Calibur . Those patients on ARTare tested for CD4 count at six months interval. An analysis of counts in naive and patient with ART was done. A correlation between viral load and CD4 count has been done in male patient with CD4 <100Results: A total of 143 patients was diagnosed with HIV as per NACO guidelines, 30(20% ) had CD4 count below 100, 51 (35%) between 100 - 500, 29(20%) above 500 all the ANC (6) have CD4 around 500 . In patients on ART (916) , 11(1.2%) had CD4 below 100 ,283(31%) between 100 - 500 , 582(64%) above 500. In males on ART with CD4 count less than 100 , viral load varied from <20 - >2,28,989copies/mlConclusion: CD4 count in HIV infected , antiretroviral naive were below 500 in 79% of cases . The decrease in CD4 count during infection ,driven by immune activation not always correlates with viral load. So CD4 count along with viral load can be used for monitoring the treatment"

ISSHID Abstract-402 Dissection of sensitivity and resistance of Chandipura virus to human complement
Umerali Kunnakkadan, Reshma Koolaparambil Mukesh, Joydeep Nag, Nisha Asok Kumar, Sreenath Muraleedharan Suma, John B JohnsonPathogen Biology lab, Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology, TrivandrumBackground: The complement system, a potent innate immune barrier faced by animal viruses, can facilitate virus neutralization or the inverse, if the virus can override complement. Chandipura virus (CHPV), a vector-borne rhabdovirus causing fatal paediatric encephalitis, following local infection, disseminates to the central nervous system via blood. The study unravels the effect of human complement on CHPV.Methods: CHPV was cultured and titrated in Vero cells. Complement susceptibility was tested with normal human serum (NHS) or heat-inactivated NHS by either varying concentrations or time followed by plaque assay. Complement dependency and pathways responsible for CHPV neutralization were dissected with respective complement-depleted/reconstituted NHS. Complement reconstitution was confirmed by haemolytic assays with rabbit or sheep RBC’s against NHS. Mechanism of neutralization and evasion were assessed with Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM, Jeol) and sucrose gradient ultracentrifugation (Beckman)Results: The concentration and time-dependent neutralization of CHPV by NHS (not HI) was complement dependent as CHPV was resistant to C3-depleted serum. Neutralization was classical pathway- dependent as EGTA treated serum, C4, and C1q-depleted sera had no effect contrary to Factor B-depleted serum. As CHPV was sensitive to C8 depleted NHS, terminal complement pathway had no role in neutralization. A marked shift in sucrose gradient suggested the mechanism of neutralization as aggregation, further validated by TEM. CHPV grown in HeLa cells were relatively less sensitive to NHS due to the presence of CD46 and CD55.Conclusion: Although sensitive to complement, CHPV possesses mechanisms to evade complement.
